I want to first thank my advisor Tom, who gave me the opportunity to pursue the
doctoral program with his guidance. Tom is a fantastic advisor, a statement that
I have been saying time and again especially new students seeking an advisor. In
Indian culture we have a special place and respect for the ``guru'' and I feel
that I was fortunate enought to find Tom and to be able to associate with him as
my ``guru''. Tom is a highly energetic, optimistic, professional, and extremely
knowledgeable person. He let's each student learn and work at his/her own
pace, he does not create work pressure, but if you are going off tracks he will
for sure warn you. He always puts us (students) first and is extremely adaptive
and flexible technically/administratively/logistically. You can pretty much
research on any topic you would like. Because of his support I was able to
explore different positions in industry and understand the contrasting but
complementary research approach in academia versus industry. I have learnt to
always move forward with Tom's guidance. No matter how many rejections you get,
his philosophy of keep trying to improve and do excellent quality research is
what I found most useful as his prodigy. Rejections and project failures are a
part and parcel of PhD journey, but what's most important is moving forward,
picking up the momentum to do your best in whatever circumstance you are in.
Tom's approach taught me this valuable lesson for not only research but as a
part of life as well. I am thankful to University of Michigan, CSE department to
give me a wonderful opportunity of associating with Tom, as my advisor.

I want to thank my labmates for being very supportive all throughout my graduate
school. Steve Pelley has been a mentor to me and I always go to him to ask for
all sorts of career advice. Faissal Sleiman is a hard working person who always
inspires me to do the right thing. Akshitha, Vaibhav, Amlan, Aasheesh, Jeff all
have been some of the fantastic smart hard working individuals I have come
across. I also want to acknowledge CSE staff members Dawn Freysinger, Lauri
Johnson, Karen Liska, and Denise Duprie who have helped in every possible way
whenever I needed administrative/logistics support from the department.

My parents -- Madhu Agarwal and Bal Krishna Agarwal -- are the reason whatever I
am today. Their constant guidance and support in life has been instrumental in
my writing this acknowledgement section today. They have provided me the shade
and comfort at each and every single step in my life even when I didn't ask for
it. They always understand what I need and are always there for me. The feeling
of having them no matter what happened in my professional or personal life is
the biggest gift I have gotten in my life. When things were not going the way I
wanted them to go for very long time and I was doubting myself all the time,
mummy papa were the one who always filled me with confidence and encouraged me
to try even harder. I have called them several times late at nights to talk about
how worried I am, how things are not happening even though I am doing all I can,
they are always there to listen to me quietly and help me move forward. I can't
imagine doing anything without their support. Thanks is a small word for what my
parents have done for me. I can just say that I am lucky enough to have them in
my life. Mummy--Papa this dissertation is your hard work and you confidence in
me to be able to sincerely work and contribute to the world.

Next, I want to talk about my brother Shyam Mohan Agarwal. He is the person who
loves me so much that at times I think what did I do to receive that much love.
He is the person because of whom I am able to fulfill my dream of studying in
the best institutes of knowledge. His encouragement and believe in me is why I
have the courage to try out new things fearlessly. He looked something in me
since childhood and he knew that I would be a scholar. It has been like he has
foreseen what I will become and then gave me a push to go and get it. Every
achievement of mine feels like he actually won something. He is the one who
enjoys my success the most. Without him experiencing the joy of what I do my
work is incomplete. He is a true inspiration to me, without whom I am not sure
how I would have a direction to pursue something that I love most doing.


I have been very fortunate to have come accross several fantastic people and be
friends with them. Gaurav, Pooja, Kataria, Gauri, Tanvi, Mohit, Kunal, Pulkit
are some names very close to my heart that I know will come for me if I need
them at any point in life. They have challenged me in several ways, making me a
better person with every interaction. Countless nights we have just sat together
and just discussed some weired mystery of life or just cribbed about how things
are unfair. These people are treasures I have found in life and have made my
life so comfortable and loving. They have played a significant role by keeping
me sane during the most self-doubting periods of PhD journey. All of my seniors
Gaurav Chadha, Ankit Sethia, Daya Khudia, and Abhayendra Singh are some of the
people who helped me acclimitize in Ann Arbor and the department during my
foundational years of my PhD. I also want to thank Nilmini...

I also want to take this chance to thank all of my collaborator for their
contributions in making my ideas more concrete and provide me the perspective
that I lacked before. I especially want to mention about the guidance and
support I got from David Nellans. \fixme{Add more stuff and move this above.}
\fixme{Ack PhD prgram and Comp Arch program chairs for fantastic conferences at
exotic locations giving me an opportunity to travel.}

Finally, I would like to mention the most important person Subhasis Das because
of whom I have been able to survive the graduate school. He is the most amazing
person that has happened to me in this life after I got a fantastic family. This
is the person without whom last 5 years would have been extremely hard. Even
after living miles away he can bring smile on my face in seconds and make
everything look good again. His presence in my life is priceless and I can't
thank God enough for bringing him in my life.  I will cherish all the fun we had
discussing technical knowledge, watching Netflix together and a getaway from
cold Ann Arbor. I have learnt a lot from Subhasis's technical approach and his
philosophy that at times you got to try million things before something actually
starts working or is meaningful. Thanks so much for being part of my life,
without you this journey will be incomplete.
